Pixelab's character creator just got a
pretty important update. Before this, if
you wanted to animate a character, most
workflows started from the default idle
pose. And that worked sometimes, but the
problem is not every animation should
start from idle. If you want a character
to move in a very specific way, it helps
a lot if the first frame is already
closer to the action you're trying to
animate. So now, inside the character
creator, we can create states.
Basically, we can take the same
character and generate new poses or
variations first before turning them
into animations. That means instead of
forcing the model to figure [music]
everything out from a neutral standing
pose, we can give it a much better
starting point. And that opens up a lot
of workflows. Better animation starts,
more consistent character variations,
cleaner transitions between poses,
[music] and way less manual setup. So in
this video, I'm going to show the full
workflow from a regular character to
animals to larger characters, and how
these can make the animation process
much easier. So let's start from the
Pixelab website. First, I'm going to
head over to the characters page. And
before we get into the new states
feature, I'm going to generate a fresh
character so you can also see the newer
V3 generation mode in action. For this
one, I'm prompting an adventurer [music]
wearing a black hood, inner white
clothing, and a red Japanese mask. Then
I'm setting the camera view to high top
down because I want this to work for a
top-down game character. And for the
size, I'm going custom, 32 by 44. This
still gets placed into a square canvas,
but giving the character a narrower
width and taller height helps the model
focus on the actual character shape
instead of wasting space around it. Now
I'll generate it. All right, there we
go. We've got our masked adventurer.
Before this update, the normal workflow
would be something like this. You'd take
this idle pose, go straight to animate,
and prompt something like walking
animation, [music]
and it could work. But because the first
frame is just standing still, the model
has to invent the walking pose from
scratch. So, sometimes the result is
usable, but it's not always clean. You
might get weird light motion,
inconsistent posing, or an animation
that technically walks, but doesn't
really start from a strong walk frame.
That's exactly what this new [music]
states update helps with. Now, we can
create the pose first and then animate
from that pose. So, I'm going to click
create state, and the idea is simple.
Describe what you want the same
character to be doing. [music] Let's
start with one of the built-in examples
here, fighting pose. And then I'm going
to create another one, mid-walk. So,
instead of asking the animation tool to
figure out the entire walk cycle from a
neutral idle pose, we're first asking
Pixelaab to give us the character
already inside the action. And there it
is. That is a mid-walk state of the same
character, same design, same general
proportions, same red mask, but now the
character is actually posed in a way
that makes sense as a starting point for
a walk cycle. That's the important part.
Now, I'm going to use this state to make
an animation. I'll click add your first
animation, choose [music] custom
animation V3, and for the prompt, I'll
keep it simple, walk loop. I'm going to
enhance the prompt just to be safe. Then
I'll define the frame count, [music] and
I'm leaving the first frame on because
the state we just created is the
starting frame. That's the whole point
here. We're not asking the model to
invent the first pose anymore. We
already [music] have it. Now, let's
generate. While that's running, let's
check the fighting pose. Yeah, that's
pretty cool. So, I'm going to add an
animation from this state, too. Again,
I'll use custom animation V3, and this
time I'll prompt something like fighting
stance idle, ready to fight. I'll
enhance the [music] prompt, and I'm
going to reduce it to six frames. One
thing to remember, since we're keeping
the first frame, six generated frames
means the final animation will have
seven frames total. [music] Now, let's
generate that one, too. All right, let's
check if the walk finished. Here's the
east walk animation, [music] and
honestly, it's already pretty decent.
The only weird thing is that the mouth
is opening a little, like he's trying to
explain the lore while walking, but
that's an easy fix. I'll click edit in
Pixelorama, open it up, and I'm just
going to copy and paste the face across
the frames. This is the kind of small
cleanup that usually takes way less time
than trying to regenerate the whole
animation [music] again. The body motion
is good, the legs are moving, the
direction reads correctly, so instead of
throwing it away, I'm just fixing the
part that's distracting. And there we
go. That's a much cleaner walk. Now,
here we have the southeast and northeast
versions. These are also usable, so I'd
probably do the same cleanup pass there.
The south one is a little too quick
compared to the others. So, for that
one, I'd probably regenerate it. That's
also part of the workflow. You don't
need every generation to be final.
Sometimes one direction is great, one
needs a tiny cleanup, and one is better
to reroll. [music]
The useful thing is that if your
character doesn't have different details
on each side, like a sword only on one
hip or a shoulder pad only on one side,
you can mirror some of these animations.
So, for a basic character, you can
generate southeast, east, and northeast,
then mirror those for the west-facing
directions. After that, you only need
south and north. That makes a full
eight-direction walk cycle way faster to
build. And here's the fighting idle.
This one is pretty funny. He's really
ready to fight. But again, the important
thing is that we didn't start from a
neutral standing pose. We started from a
fighting pose, so the animation has a
much better foundation. All right,
that's enough for a normal humanoid
character. Now, let's test animals
because yes, states work with animals,
too. Here I have this cow character.
These older walk frames were made with
skeletons, and they still work. Don't
get me wrong, but states give us another
way to approach this, especially when we
want poses that aren't just walking. So,
I'm going to create a new state. First,
let's try something more specific,
eating from the floor. Next, of course,
let's do mid-walk, [music]
and then one more, laying down. Now,
let's check them out. Here's the cow
eating from the floor, and yeah, it's
eating grass, which is pretty nice. This
is definitely usable. I'd probably clean
up the north-facing one, and I'd get rid
of the extra grass if I wanted this to
work as a clean game sprite, but as a
state, this is already doing the job.
Here's the mid-walk state. This is
exactly the kind of thing I'd want
before generating a walking animation.
[music] The legs already have motion, so
the animation tool has a much better
first frame [music] to work from. And
here's the laying down one. This might
be my favorite. Look at that. It's still
clearly the same cow, but now we have a
completely different pose, and that
opens up some really useful workflows.
Now, let's get a little more creative.
With this laying down frame, I'm going
to click add your first animation. I'll
choose custom [music] animation V3, and
then I'm going to open the advanced
options. Here, we can use interpolation.
Interpolation basically means we give
the tool a start frame [music] and an
end frame, and it generates the movement
in between. So, in this case, the laying
down state is the start frame, and the
normal standing idle frame is the end
[music] frame. Then, I'll prompt, "Stand
up." I'll enhance the prompt, generate
it, and now we have a standing up
animation. Look at that. That's exactly
why states are so useful. We're not just
making loops. We can and transitions
between poses. [music]
The character can lay down, stand up,
sit, attack, recover, react, transform,
whatever makes sense for your game. I'm
going to try the same thing with the
southeast direction, [music]
just for fun. While that's generating,
let's go back to the eating state
[music] and clean it up a little. I'll
get rid of the grass and do a small
cleanup pass. [music] I'll probably
leave the north facing one for another
time because the main point here is
showing the states feature. Not doing a
full polish pass on every direction, but
look at this. That's [music] beautiful.
And now, back to the standing up
animation. Here's the southeast one.
That's basically perfect. So, yes, you
can do this across all directions if you
[music] want a complete directional set.
Now, let's move on to walking. I'll go
to the mid walk state and let's try the
east direction first. I'll add an
animation prompt walk loop, then enhance
the prompt. I'll leave it at eight
frames just to give the animation enough
room to move. While that's generating,
I'm going to fix up the rotations of the
state and edit them [music] in
Pixelorama, just so each direction has a
cleaner starting frame. The east one was
already clean, so I didn't bother with
that one. And look at that walking
animation. That's really nice. And
again, if the design is symmetrical
enough, you can mirror the directions
and build a full eight direction walking
set and under five minutes. That's a
very different workflow compared to
trying to brute force every animation
from idle. Another cool use for states
is character variants. So, here I have
this goblin or ogre character. I'll
create a new state and prompt same
goblin red outfit. Then I'll try another
one. Same goblin wearing a Christmas
outfit. And there we go. Look at that
Christmas outfit. [music]
It's the same character, but now he has
a completely different costume. And
here's [music] the red clothing version,
too. So, now we have three variants of
the same character, created directly
from the states feature. That means
states aren't only useful for animation.
You can also use them for alternate
outfits, damaged versions, powered up
versions, seasonal versions, NPC [music]
variants, enemies with different armor,
anything where you want to keep the same
base character, but change the pose or
design. For one last test, let's try
something bigger. Here's this very
cursed monster boss. [music] It's on a
by 176 canvas, so it's a good stress
test for the feature. I'm going to
create a new state and prompt mid-grab,
grabbing what's in front of it. And then
one more, on fire. Let's see what we
get. So, here's the original idle one.
Here's the version with two arms
reaching forward like it's about to
chase the player or grab something in
front of it. And here's the one on fire.
That's pretty cool. For a boss, this is
especially useful because bosses usually
need more than just walk cycles. So,
that's the new states workflow in Pixel
Lab's character creator. Instead [music]
of forcing every animation to start from
the default idle pose, you can now
generate the pose first, then animate
from that pose. So, try making a
character, create a few states before
animating, and see how much cleaner the
animation [music] workflow feels. And if
you make something with it, especially
cursed boss states, please share it in
the Discord. That's it for this one.
Like the video if it helped, subscribe
for more [music] Pixel Lab tutorials,
and I'll see you in the next one.